I've been continue to whittle away at my 'study of difficulty and game design' book. I'm writing it out by hand in a small notepad I picked up in Turkey. Some substantial changes include dropping tactics from mental characteristics, tactics doesn't make sense without strategy (and strategy is a defining characteristic for games like chess. I also consider strategy not just different ways to satisfy the victory condition but games having different victory conditions) so while a game might require tactical decisions to play it's not a defining characteristic and is probably better served by the risk management characteristic. Moral choices is out too; it's something that a game has but I don't think 'being better at making moral choices' is something that exists in games as morality is too subjective to be useful. Politics is probably going to go too. Under social I have collaboration, negotiation and popularity fleshed out. Politics doesn't seem like it's something you can easily define and include in game design. Bluffing is probably a better representation as politics seems to be negotiation + bluffing with a dash of popularity. What do you think on Politics and Bluffing? I've not considered including bluffing before but it does feature in games like Poker.

I'm also trying to keep track of 'plays' as I see them. Anonymity is a play that reduces the influence of popularity on a game. If you don't know anything about who you are playing with, then popularity isn't a defining characteristics. 

